So now that we've
finished describing
how concurrent and
non-concurrent collectors
behave and how they're
implemented, let's go ahead
and do a demo that shows how
collectors perform in practice.
And we're going to basically
compare and contrast
concurrent and non-concurrent
collectors for the same data
sets to see how
well they perform
and how well they scale.
This example is found in my EX14
folder in my GitHub repository.
As we talked about before,
concurrent and non-concurrent
collectors perform
quite differently
when used for parallel
and sequential
streams on different
input sizes.
As I mentioned earlier, a
non-concurrent collector
operates by merging
sub results together.
So different threads will
operate on different instances
of these intermediate
result containers
as we successively
merge things together
to a final reduced result.
In contrast, a
concurrent collector
creates one concurrent
mutable result container
and then accumulates
all the elements
into that concurrent result
container from multiple threads
in a parallel stream.
So there's only one
of these things.
As a result, there's
no need to merge
any of the intermediate
sub results.
So the question
arises, of course,
is which of these
approaches is better,
and when are they better?
And so what I've
done is I've written
a test program that will
help to answer that question.
And this will show the
performance differences
between the different
types of collectors.
And what this shows is that
as the input size grows,
the choice of concurrent
versus non-concurrent collector
starts to make more and
more of a difference.
When the input sizes are small,
when we have, for example, just
1,000 words from
Shakespeare, everybody
performs about the same.
In fact, you can
actually see that
the concurrent implementation's
a little bit slower,
just because there's
extra overhead there.
But as the number
of words increases,
as the size of the things
that have to be collected
gets larger and
larger and larger,
that's where you start to see
that the concurrent collectors
really shine.
And if you look down
at the bottom, where
we have all the words of
Shakespeare, all 883,000
of them, you'll see that
we end up with much,
much faster performance for the
concurrent collector as opposed
to the non-concurrent collector.
And not surprising that we also
see much better performance
for the parallel collectors
in general than the sequential
collectors because we're
using parallel processing.
So let's go ahead
now and take a look
at the source code
for this example.
And I'll walk through
and show you why
it performs the way it does.
We're now going to
return to the EX14 test
and use it to demonstrate
the difference in performance
between collecting results
in a parallel stream
versus a sequential stream using
concurrent and non-concurrent
collectors.
So as before, we come down here.
We see that there's a
test function called
runCollectorTests.
Let's go ahead and
take a look at that.
Here's runCollectorTests.
As you can see, we're going to
run for different test sizes.
Before I look through
the code, though,
let me start this thing running.
Again, it takes a
little while to run.
So we'll let it run.
And what we do for
each of these sizes,
as before, we go ahead and get
all the works of Shakespeare
and all the words in
Shakespeare up to the limit.
First we get it as an ArrayList.
And in this case, we don't
care about LinkedList.
We already know that linked
lists don't perform very well.
So we're just going to
focus on array lists.
And then we come down
here, and we call a bunch
of different test methods.
One is going to be called
timeStreamCollectToSet.
And we're going to do
this sequentially first.
Then we're going to call
timeStreamCollectToSet,
running things in parallel,
passing in the array words.
Then we're going to
call timeStreamCollec
tToConcurrentSet.
So this is going to use a
non-concurrent collector.
This is going to use a
concurrent collector.
And as before, we're going
to do it both sequentially
by turning parallel to
false, and we're also
going to test a concurrent
set with parallel set to true.
So with that in mind, then
let's go ahead down here
and take a look at
those implementations.
So we'll skip along here
and go find the code.
So here is
timeStreamCollectToSet.
This is the one that's going
to use the version that's
a non-concurrent collector.
So as you can see, we're going
to run this thing and time it.
We're going to run it for
the number of iterations
that we set here.
We first go ahead and
get ourselves a stream
from the array list of
words of whatever size
they happen to be.
If we're running with the
parallel mode turned on,
we convert that stream
to a parallel stream.
And then what we do is
we go ahead and take
that stream, which is either
parallel or sequential,
and once again, we convert
the elements of the stream
to strings.
This time we lower case
them, just for differences
between the previous
approach, if we're
looking at Spliterator
performance, which
uppercase them.
And then we go ahead and
collect everything together
into a HashSet.
Now, as I'm sure you
recall, a HashSet
in the collection that's
created by ToCollection,
is a non-concurrent collection.
If you come over
here and look at
the
timeStreamCollectToConcurrent
set, once again, the overall
structure is very similar.
We're going to time the runs.
We're going to do a certain
number of iterations
of the runs.
We create a stream
from all the words.
We conditionally
turn that stream
to be parallel or sequential.
And then when we're done,
again, we go through the stream,
convert everything to a
string, and lower case it.
Except this time, we're
going to collect everything
with a concurrent collector,
concurrent HashSet collector,
which uses under the hood
a concurrent HashSet, which
is implemented as
a little wrapper
around concurrent HashMap.
So this is something
that can actually
be having its accumulation
collected in parallel
from multiple threads
in the stream.
So given that as background,
now let's go over
and take a look at the results.
And you can see here, we
run the collector tests.
And for 1,000 words, everybody
performs about the same.
In fact, ironically,
the parallel version
runs a little slower
for the concurrent set
when there aren't many words.
As we have more
words, however, all
of a sudden, what you'll see
is that the concurrent sets
get better.
And then when we have a lot
of words here, you can see,
especially when we get up to
100,000 words, all of a sudden,
the parallel versions
are running much better,
and the concurrent version
is running much better.
And when we get up to the
max number of words, which
is 882,311 words in
Shakespeare, now at that point,
the concurrent version
that's parallel
is running much faster,
almost twice as fast
as the one that's running
the non-concurrent collector.
And of course, the
parallel versions
are quite outstripping
the sequential versions.
So this is an illustration
of the relevance
and the importance of using
concurrent collectors when
you have large items and
you have to work with sets.